# Random Graph Hidden Markov Models for Percolation in Noisy Dynamic Networks with Application in Epileptic Seizures

# Author Contributions Checklist Form

## Part 1: Data

### Abstract 

The data used for the analysis in the paper consist of both simulated network time series, and the derived functional network time series using ECoG data on epileptic seizures in human subject. The real data we have are invasive brain voltage recordings for 3 seizures from a patient with epilepsy. Full details on network construction from brain voltage recordings are discussed in Part 3. 

### Availability 

Derived data (network time series) are available from the corresponding author on request.  Deidentified data may be available upon request to the corresponding  author with appropriate IRB approval.

### Description 

The derived network time series are stored in three MATLAB binary format files (.mat), each with a seizure example. The files have 

data\$nets[ , ,1]\$t - observation time points,  

data\$nets[ , ,1]​\$C[, ,i] - the i-th observed network (adjacency matrix)



## Part 2: Code

### Abstract

Most of the data processing and analysis for this paper were done in R. This repo provides the corresponding code to conduct both the statistical simulation study and analyses on real data sets for the case studies. 

### Description

All of the R scripts used in the paper are available in this repo. The MIT license applies to all code, and no permissions are required to access the code. The code is organized as follows:

* `Model/`: code for implementions of the model and associated inference. 
* `main_estimation*.R`: main files for parameter estimation with simulated data
* `main_test*.R`: main files for testing with both simulated and real data
* `run_*.sh`: bash scripts for submitting above main files to run in parallel
* `Simulations/`: directory to store ouput result scripts from .sh 
* `ApplicationSeizure/`: contains code for network construction from ECoG, automatic segment finder
* `generate_*.R`: scripts to reproduce figures in paper

### Optional Information

R version 3.5.1 was used for the analyses in this paper. The necessary R libraries for the code used for data processing and analysis are: igraph (v0.4.3), snow (v0.4.3), lme4 (1.1.21), lmerTest (3.0.1), car (3.0.2), sjPlot (2.6.1), R.matlab (3.6.2), ggplot2 (3.1.1), gridExtra (2.3).

  

## Part 3: Reproducibility workflow
The workflow to reproduce all Figures and Tables in the paper is provided as follows. 

### To reproduce simulation results (Section 5 in paper)

#### Table 3 
Table 3 is the mean and standard deviation of parameter estimates based on 100 replicates. Result for single trial can be obtained by running 

`main_estimation_example.R`

By setting two arguments`process='PR', process_est='PR'`, estimation results for the PR case can be obtained. For the setting in the example script, the running time is expected to be ~30mins for ER and ~100mins for PR on a standard desktop machine (Macbook pro, 2.6 GHz Intel Core i5 processor, 8G memory). 

We recommend to run the 100 replicates in parallel on a Linux computing cluster with the main script `main_estimation.R` (add argument parser upon the example main script above) and bash script `run_estimation_exp1.sh`. We recommend using 4 cores for each trial (already set up in bash script). Depending on the cluster system, the ways of submitting batch jobs in cluster may differ. The way I used is 

`qsub -t 1:100 run_estimation_exp1.sh`

Once the submitted jobs are completed, the output result scripts will be saved in *Simulations/Estimation/EXP1_N20M50* 

Table 3 can be generated by running the python script `post_analysis_exp1.py` in the directory above. 

#### Figure 5

Figure 5 is the mean and standard deviation of parameter estimates based on 20 replicates with varying setting of B. The results can be obtained using the bash script `run_estimation_exp2.sh`, which contains 4 sets of job name and input arguments. Uncomment one set and submit the job with `qsub -t 1:20 run_estimation_exp2.sh`. And repeat this process for the other job names. Note that each trial requires 4 cores and the total running time may differ significantly depending on the number of cores available to use simultaneously. In any event, the running time for one trial under the 4 different values of B is approximately 0.5 hrs, 2.5 hrs, 5 hrs and 12hrs, respectively. 

Once the submitted jobs are completed, the output result scripts will be saved in *Simulations/Estimation/EXP2_vary_B*

A summary table *data_exp2.csv* can be generated by running the python script `post_analysis_exp2.py` in the directory above, which will be used in `generate_paper_fig5-6.R` to generate Figure 5. 

#### Figure 6

Figure 6 is the mean and standard deviation of parameter estimates based on 20 replicates with different setting of (N, M). The results can be obtained using the bash script `run_estimation_exp3.sh`, which contains 12 sets of job name and input arguments. Uncomment one set and submit the job with `qsub -t 1:20 run_estimation_exp3.sh`. And repeat this process for the other job names. The approximate running time for one trial under each setting of (N, M) with 4 cores ranges from 0.7hrs (N=30, M=50) to 12 hrs (N=70, M=200). Again each trial requires 4 cores and the total running time may differ significantly depending on the number of cores available to use simultaneously. 

Once the submitted jobs are completed, the output result scripts will be saved in *Simulations/Estimation/EXP3_vary_NM*

A summary table *data_exp3.csv* can be generated by running the python script `post_analysis_exp3.py` in the directory above, which will be used in `generate_paper_fig5-6.R` to generate Figure 6. 

#### Figure 7

Figure 7 is the size of GCC over normalized time for ER and PR percolation curves, which can be generated by running `generate_paper_fig7.R`. The running time for this script is less than 1min. 

#### Figure 8, Figure 9, Table 4

Figure 8 (left) is the rate of detection for ER and PR based on 100 replicates with different settings for B, t_norm and N. Figure 8 (right), Figure 9 and Table 4 are results from fitting GLMM on the testing results in Figure 8 (left). Result for single trial can be obtained by running 

`main_test_example.R`

For the setting in the example script above, the running time is expected to be ~40mins on a standard desktop machine (Macbook pro, 2.6 GHz Intel Core i5 processor, 8G memory). We recommend to run the 100 replicates in parallel on a Linux computing cluster with the main script `main_test.R` (add argument parser upon the example main script above) and bash scripts

 `run_N10.sh` `run_N20.sh` `run_N30.sh`

Each bash script contains 24 sets of job name and input arguments. Uncomment one set and submit the job with, e.g. `qsub -t 1:100 run_N10.sh`. And repeat this process for the other job names. The approximate running time for one trial under each setting of (B, t_norm, N) with 4 cores ranges from 10 mins (N=10, t_norm=0.8, B=50,000) to 22 hrs (N=30, t_norm=2.4, B=500,000). Each trial requires 4 cores and the total running time depends on the number of cores available to use simultaneously. 

Once the submitted jobs are completed, the output result scripts will be saved in *Simulations/Testing/N10*,  *Simulations/Testing/N20*, and *Simulations/Testing/N30*. 

Then aggregate testing results from separate output scripts by running the python scripts `post_analysis_N30.py`,`post_analysis_N30.py` and `post_analysis_N30.py` in the respective directories above. *data10.csv*,  *data10_all.csv*, *data20.csv*,  *data20_all.csv*, *data30.csv*,  *data30_all.csv* will be obtained after this step. Then run `generate_paper_fig8-9.R` to generate Figures 8-9 and Table 4. 

#### Figures in the Supplement 

Simulation results in the Supplement similar to Figure 8-9 and Table 4 can be reproduced using `run_N_10_20_30_vary_r.sh`, `post_analysis_all_data_lowR` and `generate_paper_fig8-9.R`. The workflow is the same. 



### To reproduce application results (Section 6 in paper)

Data used in the section are network time series constructed from the brain voltage recordings on epileptic seizures. The code we used for network construction is from https://github.com/Mark-Kramer/dppm. `ApplicationSeizure/ConstFunNets` contains the specific portion of code we used from network construction in this project. 

#### Figure 10

Figure 10 is the density and gcc over time for one real seizure with segments detected for test in black color. The figure can be reproduced by running

`ApplicationSeizure/auto_detect_curve2_hemi_new_start.R`

#### Table 5

Table 5 is the testing results for the chosen segment, which can be obtained by running `main_test_seizure.R`. The results reported are mean and standard deviation based off 10 runs. Each run takes approximately 48 hours. We recommend to run the 10 replicates in parallel in cluster using the bash script `run_test_seizure_new6.sh` . Results for each run will be stored in `ApplicationSeizure/Results`, and the mean and standard deviation can be obtained by running `post_analysis_seizure_results6.py` in the directory. 





### 
